Grand Theft Auto: San Andreas is a 2004 action-adventure game developed by Rockstar North and published by Rockstar Games. It is the seventh title in the Grand Theft Auto series and the first main entry since 2002's Grand Theft Auto: Vice City. Set within the fictional state of San Andreas, based on California and Nevada, the game follows Carl "CJ" Johnson, who returns home after his mother's murder and finds his old friends and family in disarray. Over the course of the game, he attempts to re-establish his old gang, clashes with corrupt cops, and gradually unravels the truth behind his mother's murder.

The game is played from a third-person perspective and its world is navigated on foot or by vehicle. The open world design lets the player freely roam San Andreas, consisting of three metropolitan cities: Los Santos, San Fierro, and Las Venturas, based on Los Angeles, San Francisco, and Las Vegas, respectively. The narrative is based on multiple real-life events in Los Angeles, including the Bloods and Crips street gang rivalry, 1990s crack epidemic, 1992 Los Angeles riots, and the Rampart scandal. The game was released in October 2004 for the PlayStation 2, and in 2005 for Windows and the Xbox. Enhanced versions were released in the 2010s, followed by a remastered version in 2021.

The game received critical acclaim for its characters, narrative, open world design, and visual fidelity, but mixed responses towards its mission design and technical issues. It generated controversy when the discovery of the "Hot Coffee" minigame unlocked a previously hidden sexual scene. Several gaming publications awarded the game year-end accolades, and it is considered one of the sixth generation console gaming's most significant titles and among the best video games ever made. San Andreas became the best-selling video game of 2004 and the best-selling PlayStation 2 game, with over 27.5 million copies sold. Its successor, Grand Theft Auto IV, was released in April 2008.

Grand Theft Auto: San Andreas is an action-adventure game played from a third-person view.[2] In the game, players controls criminal Carl "CJ" Johnson and completes missions—linear scenarios with set objectives—to progress through the story. Outside of missions, players can freely roam the game's open world and complete optional side missions.[3][4] A multiplayer mode allows two players to roam the world.[5] The fictional state of San Andreas is composed of three metropolitan cities: Los Santos, San Fierro, and Las Venturas.[6] The cities are unlocked as the story progresses;[7] fast travel is available at airports.[8]: 1  Safehouses can be purchased to save the game and store vehicles.[8]: 20 

Players may run, jump, swim, or use vehicles to navigate the world,[9] and use melee attacks, firearms and explosives to fight enemies, including the ability to dual wield firearms and commit drive-by shootings.[10][11] Weapons are purchased from local firearms dealers or retrieved from dead enemies or in the world.[12] In combat, auto-aim can be used against enemies.[8]: 42  Several stealth elements were introduced in the game.[13] Should players take damage, their health meter can be fully regenerated through health pick-ups, and body armour can be used to absorb gunshots and explosive damage.[10][14] Players respawn at hospitals when their health depletes.[15] If players commit crimes, law enforcement may respond as indicated by a "wanted" meter in the head-up display. Stars displayed on the meter indicate the current wanted level; at the maximum six-star level, police helicopters and military swarm to lethally dispatch players.[8]: 1  Officers will search for players who leave the wanted vicinity. The meter enters a cool-down mode and eventually recedes when players are hidden from the officers' line of sight.[8]: 29 

In the world, gang wars are prompted when players attack rival gang members; the territory is won when players survive three enemy waves. To retain territories, they must be defended from enemy gang attacks.[8]: 196  While free roaming the world, players may engage in activities such as burglary, fire fighting, pimping, taxi cab, and vigilante missions.[8]: 176–180  San Andreas introduced role-playing elements to customise CJ's accessories, clothing, hairstyles, and tattoos.[10][16] Balancing food and physical activity impacts CJ's appearance and physical attributes; eating and exercising maintains health.[17] Players can learn three styles of hand-to-hand combat—boxing, kickboxing, and kung fu—at gyms in each city.[8]: 144–145 [18]: 31  The game tracks respect among CJ's friends, which varies according to his actions and appearance,[8]: 1  and acquired skills such as driving, firearms handling, lung capacity, muscles, and stamina.[9][8]: 4  Players can date six different girls and take them to dinner, drinks, or dancing.[8]: 200–201  Vehicles can be accessorised with modifications like hydraulics, nitrous oxide engines, and stereo systems.[8]: 201–204 

In 1992, following his mother's murder in a drive-by shooting, CJ (Young Maylay) returns to Los Santos after five years. He is intercepted by corrupt C.R.A.S.H. officers led by Frank Tenpenny (Samuel L. Jackson), who threatens to implicate CJ in a murder unless he co-operates with them. CJ returns to Grove Street and reunites with his brother Sweet (Faizon Love), sister Kendl (Yolanda Whittaker), and members of his old gang, Big Smoke (Clifton Powell) and Ryder (MC Eiht). Discovering the Grove Street Families (GSF) have lost much of their territory, CJ restores the gang to power by helping to reunite the various GSF sets who had splintered, allying himself with Kendl's boyfriend, Cesar Vialpando (Clifton Collins Jr.), leader of the Aztecas gang. CJ and Cesar witness Smoke and Ryder meeting with Tenpenny and members of the rival Ballas gang, and discover that they had been working with Tenpenny and were responsible for CJ's mother's murder. Suspecting a set-up, CJ rushes to Sweet's aid in a showdown against the Ballas.

Sweet, who was wounded in the ambush, is imprisoned by police while Tenpenny exiles CJ in the countryside. Tenpenny forces CJ to carry out favours that eliminate witnesses who could expose his corruption. CJ also befriends a hippie called the Truth (Peter Fonda) and Triad leader Wu Zi Mu (James Yaegashi). After winning the deed to a garage in San Fierro, CJ sets it up to earn money. While in San Fierro, CJ crosses paths with the Loco Syndicate, Smoke and Ryder's drug connection. CJ infiltrates the organisation and identifies its leader, the mysterious Mike Toreno (James Woods). Along with Cesar and the Triad, CJ kills Ryder and the other Loco Syndicate leaders, and destroys the Syndicate's drug factory. Soon after, CJ is contacted by Toreno, who reveals himself to be a government agent spying on criminal operations. He enlists CJ's help in several shady operations in exchange for Sweet's release from prison. In the meantime, CJ and Wu Zi Mu establish a casino in Las Venturas.

After Sweet's release, he and CJ revive the GSF, driving off the rival gangs from their territory and rebuilding throughout Los Santos. Tenpenny is arrested and tried for several felonies, but the charges are dropped due to lack of witnesses, prompting a city-wide riot. CJ soon discovers Smoke's hideout. The two engage in a gunfight; CJ wins and, before dying, Smoke confesses he got caught up with the power and money. Tenpenny arrives, holding CJ at gunpoint while he steals Smoke's drug money, and causes an explosion in the building. Tenpenny escapes in a fire truck, followed by CJ and Sweet; Tenpenny eventually loses control of the truck, crashing over the side of a bridge. CJ and his friends watch as Tenpenny dies of his injuries. In the aftermath, CJ's family and friends celebrate their success at the Johnson house. In the midst of the celebrations, CJ leaves to check on the neighbourhood.